I was talking to Ruth Catlow yesterday
and they mentioned that everyone has a
story about the time where they didn't
get onto the blockchain so they
encountered the ideas and they're like
that's a bit weird all this is a bit
crazy or mm-hmm
maybe it won't be something I need to
learn about my moment like that was back
in 2011 when I actually tried to start
making blockchain art and I said on my
blog okay if anyone gives me a Bitcoin I
would draw you a Bitcoin and mail it to
you and one person actually got in touch
with me and said so how do we go about
doing this and I freaks out I was like
hang on what happens if the price of
Bitcoin just collapses and I'm left this
worthless Bitcoin so I didn't get back
to them and that's how I didn't get my
first Bitcoin after that initial moment
of really not guessing it Bitcoin and
cryptocurrency in the blockchain didn't
go away and I just kept encountering the
ideas and the ideas became interesting
to me and because it was after the
financial crisis because it was at the
moment where web 2 I was being taken
over by the current Internet giants the
ideas of a sort of autonomous currency
and network that runs without rulers
without masters and a system that has a
very very 1990s style attitude towards
identity being very pseudonymous and
something that you you play with and can
take on and cast off as you wish started
appealing to me more and more and I try
to explain this to people and they would
look at me like I was crazy
so the way that I explained this to
myself and to other people was by
writing face coin now face coin is a
proposal for a proof of work system the
type that Sam spoke about earlier the
current Bitcoin proof of work system
uses electricity to run an algorithm to
basically find random numbers with very
long strings of zeros at the end which
is difficult to do so it slows down
work and you prove that you've done some
work and when people find out this is
how Bitcoin is secured they get very
upset on what they regard as the waste
of all this energy it's not really
wasted it's used to secure the network
but it looks extravagant compared to a
single light bulb or the country of
Norway so there are various proposals to
make useful proof-of-work systems or
rather than doing random numbers of lots
of zeros at the end you are trying to
sequence genomes or sequence genomes so
I thought rather than doing useful work
for useless work let's do the work of
art because art is sort of in many ways
defined by the fact that it is useless
you can't you if you use a Picasso as an
ironing board you're making a mistake
but it still has value so what was the
simplest thing that you can make art
from it's a drawing for face and what's
a nice way of finding faces it's using
machine vision algorithms so what face
coin does is it does and it's not an
actual cryptocurrency but it's a
demonstration for one so it does the
work the Bitcoin does of generating like
a block of information and then trying
to find something by modifying that
information and rather than trying to
find strings of zeros it's trying to
find faces so it starts out with a
nicely blurred block of beta and after a
while it finds something that it thinks
looks like a face and then after the war
longer it finds something looks a bit
more like a face and the next one and I
just like this it's sort of you get into
it is you get to fear when it's actually
running you get a feel for the rhythm of
the blockchain and the work that's
involved but you're not having to
understand what a sha-256 sum or
anything is because you're looking for
faces which you can do and you're better
at than the computer but it's kind of
fun to watch it searching through
one of the things I love doing with
crypto is collaboration I've been really
lucky in the people I've ended up
collaborating with one my absolute
favorites was coin artist on Twitter
miss Simon who creates alternate reality
games with cryptocurrency things so they
get series of puzzles together they are
often paintings or drawings or other
artworks Colossus makes and these are
sort of reveals on the internet people
go through them they search for clues
they get together sometimes they crack
them much more quickly than you might
expect sometimes they crack them much
more slowly the one that they cracked
really really really slowly was this
painting by con artist called The Legend
of Satoshi Nakamoto
I helped encode a message into the
painting when you tell people this and
they know about Bitcoin and they think
oh you use QR codes for representing
Bitcoin addresses so there's probably a
QR code in the chessboard patent but
there's not enough squares free QR code
so I don't know why people really
focused in on that where the message is
hidden and the message is a Bitcoin
private key for a wallet which contained
almost 5 bitcoins where that is hidden
in the flames around the edge and the
way it's hidden in the flames is and to
be entirely clear someone has solved the
puzzle and claimed the prize so I'm okay
to tell you this now the way it's
encoded is the height of the flames the
width of the flames and the color of the
flames so I think it's a six bit
encoding and for whatever reason but
most puzzles use like one bit binary
encodings but going up to six bits just
really really really made it much harder
than I think we expected when the prize
was put in to the puzzle five Bitcoin
were worth about $1,200 I think or do
you know it was there was a lot of money
it's but it's not a ridiculous amount of
money what is a ridiculous amount of
money is $60,000 which is what the prize
went up to during the great Bitcoin
price rise at the end of last
and so I had people following me on
Twitter who I'm sure we're just there
waiting for me to let slip a clue about
this but fortunately no one ever came up
to me in person and threatened me or
like tried to get me extremely drunk and
pick my brains or anything but it was a
weird insight into you know that the the
cyberpunk world were actually sometimes
you do have secrets that you have to
keep and there may be people you want to
get them from you and you should
probably encrypt them better than you
have and as with face coin I just loved
the way that coin artist puzzles draw
you into the ideas around cryptocurrency
around the blockchain in this case the
way that private keys work the way that
security for your Bitcoin accounts work
and the way collaborating to crack a
puzzle works once you've extracted the 6
bit message from the flames there's one
more step you need a key to re-encode
them and people just couldn't find the
key they're like we know we need a key
we've got all these bits we can't work
out where the key is where could the key
possibly be that's a painting of a key
sticking into a key hole in the board
with ribbons on it
and the ribbons represent the key as
bits and then for some reason the key
being a key was just too obvious for
people so I was I was very relieved and
I could finally have a sort of moment of
exasperation ago it was a key how much
more obvious could we have made it but
it was wonderful watching people get
together and collaborate around sort of
really working through the structure of
the puzzle and the piece of art that
coin artist sort of had made with it and
for me that's one of the things that
blockchain are the crypto currency art
can do is to engage people getting
really to dive into the ideas and not to
dive into the ideas in a you know let
lets understand all this technology can
do to replace this particular database
in a way that makes them sort of work
together a new way to sort sort of work
on creative tasks that they otherwise
wouldn't and yeah I was really proud to
be involved in this a collaboration the
other way around
was bad tribe which was a short story I
wrote at the end of 2014
it was copy edited in 2016 and was then
published in 2017 and it is a story set
about 15 years from now in the world
where cryptocurrency has one we don't
know how the writer of the story who is
incredibly unreliable particularly
doesn't know and we don't care if this
one you know we accept this as part of
the story and as I say the characters a
young person who's never really thought
how their world works one morning they
wake up they do the usual thing that
they do was they check the leaderboard
for who's being the absolutely best
Scheib in their area and their downward
spiral starts there that's the cover um
roof throughout the afterword you're
said to it by talk I think yeah over to
Dubai talk in England think you're
talking does a great job getting it down
from 7,000 words which very little
happens to 4,000 words and about the
same amount happening and the
illustrations including the cover here
were done by the marvelous Lena Theodora
this isn't a spoiler but it's a scene at
the end this is a picture of why is the
protagonist going to school it's not a
cartoon animal universe it's not a
Disney universe the problem is than the
writer tells you absolutely nothing
about other people's they don't want to
give away their identities so I don't
really know what the lead character
looks like so Lee and I had a bit of a
problem in illustrating a story where
you're deliberately not told what anyone
looks like and they did but they did
brilliant job doing it so that's why is
talking to their teacher at school and
this is actually an installation of the
illustrations at
further field gallery in London in
England so the little glowing rectangles
are tablets or phones or some short
wires would regard them showing the
different illustrations and on their
read you the start of Weiss's journey
Wow it's two days since I ran checks are
we there yet
hello phone what's my rank Wow much
slippage this noob who's ahead of me in
the rankings amaze banks Liam
seventy-eights come out of nowhere and
is tipping like a true shied truer amaze
such tip each we tip off fellowships to
show our appreciation bang zoom 78 must
be surrounded by a maze drives very
amazed where was I I was asleep
Wow I'm lying on the couch I like the
couch I like our room the light coming
through the planks over the window is
either morning or evening wait if it's
that strong it's evening school soon I
was working at the orchid today much
carrying such labor so hot
maximal tiredness oh that's why I was
asleep and why it's evening I look at my
phone again
bangs room 78 has graduated to the
regionals amazed I feel a twinge of Envy
before I remember that we are all going
to the moon I put down my phone and lie
on the couch and look at my Ducks on the
Shelf many ducks though though it's
plush skeleton ducks that you find the
swap meets I tell every Scheib I think
they're funny but the truth is I feel
sorry for them I know she wipes wants
them free
but seriously notion I was going to want
them now except me my phone pings kitty
I'm late for school as you will have
noticed it's not written in everyday
English
the language is a melange of Doge speak
sewon though though to speak that the
slide that Sam showed earlier with the
Shiba Inu dog in the basket with comic
sans text saying Wow and amazing
everything that's that's page speak and
it was a bizarrely successful meme in
2014 that gave rise to a bizarrely
successful initially joke cryptocurrency
called dogecoin and the thing that I
absolutely loved about dogecoin is the
culture around it that was its secret
source that was its innovation it had a
shorter blocked I'm sure it had sort of
the very fine-grained currency that's
all great there were lots of currencies
like that at the time the different
thing was the dogecoin has brought memes
and it develops community and they
develop language and they developed
principles of how your excellent one
other they sponsored a NASCAR car they
sponsored Jamaican bobsled team and they
they stole the the phrase to the moon
from other cryptocurrencies which is
used to say yet at this cryptocurrency
which is currently not worth very much
is going to go up massively in value you
should hold onto it or huddle as they
say encrypt Islands and yeah they just
sort of became almost a mantra which in
the story I turn into an actual mantra
and it's not the currency that's going
to the moon there's all of us we are all
going to the moon I was amazed by the
longevity of dogecoin not an absolutely
no disrespect to the community or to the
to the current sea itself is just that
sort of memes have a very short shelf
life but you do still see in social
media feeds sort of pictures as little
yellow and white dogs with Comic Sans
over them so I wrote this as I say at
the end of 2014 as a deliberate exercise
an almost immediate obsolescence I
expected it to look like a 1960s surfer
movie in about six months
and so when Doge water memes continued
and dogecoin
you those really really quite sort of
worried that my exercise in anachronism
would become an unintentional exercise
and anachronism so some things like
you'll notice on saying Scheib people
are starting to say she but because it
sounds more like Shiba Inu there's a bit
halfway through where they're talking
about the Doge of Venice because the dog
is the Doge and the ruler of Venice used
to be called the Doge and why is doesn't
understand it and that's because at the
time Doge wasn't pronounced pagers
pronounced Oh Gordo Gill just pretty
much anything other than Doge and then
there's this great vowel shift about six
months after I wrote the story where
spontaneously everyone just started
saying Doge but it's it's collected in
the artists rethinking the block train
book which I can't recommend highly
enough if you don't already have it and
it has smaller reproductions of the
illustrations in and the full text of
the story so do check it out and thanks
again to Leena for illustrating it
collaboration is great my diving scripta
currents led me naturally to a theory am
the theorem that work sort of became a
hot story and then had the sort of I
guess you could call it the first ICO
where they sort of sold the the token to
use the network then successfully launch
the network upsetting everyone who said
they've never launched the network and I
loved aetherium because of the
centrality of smart contracts which very
sort of really switched me on to the
idea of the whole codes and law things
are thank you for that and smart
contracts that that's the classic
example given historically of a smart
contract as a vending machine nick szabo
the guy who came up with the idea a
smart contracts used a vending machine
that you go up to you have some money
you enter your money into the vending
machine and you get the soda or the
fatty snack of your choice out of it
without human intervention this is
effectively a sale contract
you have executed with without human or
loyally lawyer
intervention and so the idea is that
Bitcoin transactions are also a kind of
simple smart contract you have a
transfer of value which absolutely human
being initiates but it's then
automatically carried out by the system
without anyone intervening will be able
to stop it and the theory and just sort
of turned this up to 11 took it much
further and said okay rather than smart
contracts for just for exchange of value
let's have smart contracts that work and
represent any kind of information and do
pretty much any kind of computation on
them and sort of treat that as a way of
building new unstoppable code to the
website used to say that you can start
embody principles and it will then run
and effect those principles and maintain
its data to make sure that those
principles are observed now this is a
very old etherium programming language
there's much newer programming languages
in this but it's a very very simple
smart contract and the information it
contains it's not an amount of money
it's not geographic coordinates it's not
a reputation score it's not a sort of
database of quantities of stock in the
warehouse it's whether the contract
itself is an artwork or not and I
absolutely stole this idea shamelessly
from the history of art this is a
classic conceptual art move that can set
the conceptual art of the 1960s and 70s
as well my favorite are movements it's
it's quite austere it's sort of the idea
that you know you're a young artist
you're making art after Jackson Pollock
has finished doing really active really
expressive painting you probably aren't
going to be able to push more things in
the expressive an active way so let's go
the other way let's would retreat from
that physicality and start making art
that consists either of ideas or of
instructions or or sensations and
the classic move in that is there's the
artist nominating something as on so as
an artist on stage I now declare that
speaker off camera to be art and that's
not on and no it's not and that's not
okay so you get the idea and the way
that this became authenticated by the
existing art world and our market is
this very hard to sell an idea you can't
claim copyrights on an idea you have to
have like some fixed physical expression
of it and the idea of a column of air
that maybe somewhere in the world is
it's my dear you can't sell that what
you can do is create a certificate or a
contract which says I the artist who has
had this idea of a call of air somewhere
in the world hereby sells
you know this certificate to you for 100
dollars or whatever and you've created a
saleable proxy for something which would
otherwise exist only as an idea and
we've seen this take off in blockchain
art with the whole rare art scene where
you have sort of infinitely copyable
digital files that as Cory Doctorow says
trying to make information less copyable
is like trying to make water less wet
you can if I give you an image and say
please don't copy this there's very
little I can do to stop your copying it
and with initially the rare pepe site
and system and there with all the
various different rare arts platforms
you can take your digital files that you
have creates block train tokens for them
and sell those tokens and that's a very
familiar move from the history of
conceptual art where rather than it
being infinitely copyable files its
ideas or instructions and rather than it
being digital tokens which can be copy
which cannot copy the whole point which
could be transferred on the blockchain
with the full security of you know a
large chunk of the world's computing
power making sure that nobody steals it
it was little contracts so that's where
this comes from
it has a nice web interface so it's
adapt if it's all it says it's all if it
this isn't not up and there's a user
interface which I'm not showing here but
if you if you go to it on my site with a
theorem enabled browser you can go in
there pay just the fee for the
computation I don't make any money from
this and you can be the person who
declares whether this contractors office
or not so we're taking all of the
legitimizing power of the history of
Arts and all of the power of control if
if here in blockchain and just
democratizing it making something that
anyone can say what is art and what
isn't and so I really got into making
smart contracts and tying the idea of
what people are now going crazy about is
governance to it but sort of finding
different ways to associate basically
ascetic properties with ways of setting
them with ways of controlling them so we
have obviously
oh I'm sorry there's this art being
shown in the phone space as a theory or
the other year so I did things like a
democratic palette
what colors should everyone use what
color should we paint with what colors
should our clothes be let's not leave it
to an irrational market or some top-down
bureaucracy let's make it so everyone
can vote on the colors that we should
use and so this is a democratic palette
the background blow ups are the cars of
palette and the user interface which I'm
showing this time is a color chooser and
you can then vote to the company you
like what symbols should we use what
symbols should we have decorating our
shoes what symbols should we have as
sort of airbrushing on walls in graffiti
well I don't know I shouldn't be the
person who telling you this let's make
it so there's an aetherium dap that you
can enter a lottery each day where you
enter the symbol that you want and you
might be the lucky winner with the
person who gets to tell the world what
symbol should be seen everywhere and i
it's a way of sort of working through
all your feeling through the ways that
people put all of their hopes and dreams
for a Sam said utopian forms of
organization on the blockchain its
satirical but it s worth bad tribe it
there's no cruelty here I'm not trying
to mock anyone who is going to make a
better world I'm trying to give as with
face coin as a bad tribe I'm trying to
give people ways into sort of finds an
angle on these ideas that work some
identified the way that this space
breeds metaphors it's people try to
understand it I'm trying to make look
visual hooks or visual cues for
understanding instead and that brings me
to shelling flags which is outside in
the show here so the blockchain is very
much tied up with ideas of identity
whether it's your cryptographic key that
you buy their youths and transactions
with or establishing that your are
trustworthy individual growing it has
one courage graphically and should be
allowed to vote on the future of the
planet and this is a very rarefied idea
of identity this isn't for one's for
better shorthand and identity politics
idea of identity or a state bureaucracy
idea if identity it's an idea of
identity that we get through the
cyberpunk movement and one of the ways
that people show their allegiance to an
identity be it national be it's the
sporting team be a region be it agenda
or other identity is through flags and
there are a full-scale block train
nation projects which I'm sure will need
a flag and if they don't have a flag yet
here's the system for them but the idea
with using Flags rather than anything
more more more industrial-strength for
establishing allegiance to something is
again their place in the history of our
some of my favorite art is around
against satirical flags for different
organizations or projects by what where
artists have gone out into the past
people so you know what is your ideal
what is your ideal like an augur face up
for something and then making that the
flag or a painting out of that and
people never like it when you give them
what they think they want
so again democratizing the ability just
to make a flag to sign and have anyone
pledge allegiance to it this is the
leaderboard
these are the most popular flags as of
moment they are not for any particular
movement nation or creed because there
wasn't such I made to demonstrate a
system please make a flag and start
pumping these after the running I'm
really interested to see what people do
with this and yeah it's as as I say it's
an extension of the ideas that I've been
working with since I started doing this
seriously around the start to 2014
around it sort of getting people to take
what things mean in the blockchain world
and what they mean in the our historical
world and what they mean more broads the
political world just bring them together
and learn through play and sort of have
fun doing it and make hearts that helps
other people do so so thank you